---
layout: post
title: Welcome, Swift devs!
excerpt: There we are, I finally decided to start a blog… but what to blog about?
categories: news
---

Hi all,

## Who am I?

For those who don’t know me yet, I’m [@aligatr on Twitter](https://twitter.com/aligatr) and [AliSoftware on GitHub](https://github.com/AliSoftware). Some of you may also know me via [CocoaPods](https://cocoapods.org/about), as I’m an active contributor of the project (even if not as active as some others like Orta, Samuel and the others!), and others may also use my [`OHHTTPStubs`](https://cocoapods.org/pods/OHHTTPStubs) pod used by a lot of people to do testing and stubbing network request.

During the day I’m an iOS developer and software architect, who like imagining new components and nice APIs, build models for apps and use fun patterns to organize code nicely. During the night… well I continue to do the same in my dreams, of course.

## Why a blog?

So here I am, starting a blog at last…

I never started blogging before because I was afraid not to have time to write articles, and not sure I had something interesting to share, and didn’t want my blog to be abandoned short after being started.

But since then, there has been plenty of times when I though about some subjects and nice ideas that were worth sharing and was missing that place to write about it. So here it is, let’s start it and hope it last.

I don’t promise you that I’ll write very often or regularly, because I know I’d fail that promise pretty quickly. But the idea of this blog is to **share interesting ideas and concepts about programming,** like nice **tips and tricks**, some **patterns** and ways to do stuff nicer, or some **reflexions** about new **concepts** that could start some interesting discussions.

I hope you’ll like it, and don’t hesitate to give some feedback on twitter!
