---
layout: post
title: "A quick list of overlooked announcements at WWDC'16"
categories: conferences
---

Ok, so sadly I wasn't at WWDC this year 😢 and followed it only on video 🎥 and Twitter. I bet you all saw the big announcements made during the keynote and the Platform State of the Union talks 🎉. But did you know about all those other new APIs that were added more silently? 🕵

## Purpose

The problem with the WWDC each year is there are tons of info and announcements and videos and so little time to watch and experiment on everything!

The purpose of this list is NOT to be exhaustive. It's merely to allow you to discover topics you might have missed, so you can decide to take some of your time to look for info in the WWDC videos, read the associated documentation, experiment in a playground… when you have time.

I'll probably update this list later to add 🎬 WWDC session numbers and links to talks or blog posts; for now I didn't want to let that list in my drafts for too long 😉
{: .note }

## New APIs

### Speech Recognition

New `SFSpeechRecognizer` framework to analyze speech and do some Speech-to-Text by code

### SiriKit

_Ok you probably didn't miss this one. But still included in the list because that's still a topic I want to experiment with when I'll have more time._

Provide SiriKit with static & dynamic vocabulary specific to your app, and let Siri call your app with the interpreted meta-data (`Intent`) so you can take action.

👀 [Programming Guide](https://developer.apple.com/library/prerelease/content/documentation/Intents/Conceptual/SiriIntegrationGuide/index.html##//apple_ref/doc/uid/TP40016875), [Intents.framework](https://developer.apple.com/reference/intents) and [IntentsUI.framework](https://developer.apple.com/reference/intentsui)  
👀 🎬 #217
{: .note }

### Dedicated Notifications framework

* Unifies local and remote notifications
* Include media in your notifications, like images and GIFs
* Be notified when the user dismisses your notification
* Get the list of notifications of your app, control their trigger date, update them, ability to delete an old notification…
* [Access the User Notifications settings from code](https://twitter.com/NatashaTheRobot/status/744506324696760320)

👀 `UserNotifications.framework` & `UserNotificationsUI.framework` documentation
{: .note }

### CloudKit

Initiate a CloudKit sharing operation and display a view controller that lets users view and modify participants and start and stop sharing.

👀 `UICloudSharingController` & `UICloudSharingControllerDelegate`  
You can also see that in action in Notes.app in iOS 10
{: .note }

### CoreGraphics

Swiftier API, especially the C-like API is gone, you can now use `context.xxx()` instead of `CGContextXXX()` on a lot of CoreGraphics APIs

### Foundation

#### Dates

* `NSISO8601DateFormatter` is at last officially in Foundation!
* New `NSDateInterval` type

#### Measurements & Units 

New APIs in Foundation to convert from and to various measurement units.

#### De-stringification of a lot of APIs

* `NSCalendarIdentifier` is now a dedicated type (instead of a `NSString`)
* `NSError.domain` is now an `NSErrorDomain` instead of a `NSString`
* Notifications use `NSNotificationName` instead of `NSString`
* `stringByApplyingTransform:reverse:` uses `NSStringTransform` type instead of `NSString`
* `NSRunLoop.mode` is now an `NSRunLoopMode` instead of… yeah you guessed it
* `NSHTTPCookie` properties are now `[NSHTTPCookiePropertyKey: AnyObject]` instead of `[NSString: AnyObject]`
* and so on

#### New logging API

Global function `os_log` with various log levels, etc

### Networking

* New `NSURLSessionTaskMetrics` task type

### UITableView & UICollectionView prefetching

* Pre-fetching: pre-load data before arriving at the end of the scoll area, to implement multi-paging more easily.
* `UIRefreshControl` available on any `UIScrollView`, not just `UITableViewController`
* new `UICollectionViewFlowLayoutAutomaticSize` CollectionView layout!

### GCD

New `Dispatch` API introduced in Swift 3 for GCD. This makes working with GCD in Swift 3 a lot easier… and a lot prettier!

### UUID value type

There is now a new `UUID` type in Swift 3, which is a value type (as opposed to ObjC's `NSUUID`).

### UIViewPropertyAnimator

The new `UIViewPropertyAnimator` class is an alternative to the well known `UIView.animateWithDuration(…)` API, but can do a lot more, including:

* interrupting the animation mid-flight
* changing the values after animation started
* making the animation interactive by changing its `percentComplete` property
* or even binding that `percentComplete` to a `UIGestureRecognizer` for example

### UIPasteboard

`UIPasteboard` now has the ability to **share clipboards between devices**, e.g. to copy from your Mac and paste on your iPhone/iPad and vice-versa!

### UITabBar

Additional control over the appearance of the badge on a tab bar item, such as background color and text attributes.

### CoreData

* Better integration with Swift
* Transparent support of fetching and faulting
* Tighter integration with Xcode, including better generation and ability to **update** your `NSManagedObject` subclasses.

### ApplePay

* Apple Pay is now supported on the Web (on Safari 10 only)
* New countries supported (including mine 🇫🇷!)

### Messages API

* New framework to build iMessage-based apps
* Ability to create iMessage Sticker packs

👀 🎬 #204 & 🎬 #224
{: .note }

## watchOS 3

I'm not a watchOS developer, so I might have overlooked a lot there, but I noted that watchOS3 has:

* better launch times
* no more Glances, now concept of App Switcher
* background updates API to update App Switcher screenshot
* access to digital crown and gyroscope events

## tvOS

* Unified SSO (Single SignOn) to make login and managing passwords on tvOS apps easier
* When you move the focus to a textField in tvOS 10, [a notification with a text field appears on your iPhone/iPad](https://twitter.com/olebegemann/status/744881057208602624) to act as a remote keyboard!

## New tools in Xcode

* New Visual Debugging Tools, esp. Memory and Thread Sanitizer
* New Code Signing mechanism
* Xcode Extensions
* Ability to choose Swift 2.3 or Swift 3.0 in Xcode 8
* Documentation revamped
* Image name completion, Color & Image literals in code

## Other topics to play with

* The Playgrounds App on iPad
* new Apple File System (APFS)
* Ability to remove built-in apps (Stocks, etc) from your Springboard on iOS10
* Apple [open-sourced LZFSE](https://github.com/lzfse/lzfse), their compression algorithm lib & CLI.

## Various important info

* At the end of 2016, Apple will make ATS mandatory for all developers who hope to submit their apps to the App Store.
* You're now **required** to declare the `XXXUsageDescription` in your `Info.plist` to access protected data (e.g. `NSCalendarsUsageDescription` to access user's calendar data). If you don’t, your app will now exit when it tries to access the data!

## Links

To create that list, I got inspiration mostly from my Twitter feed, but also from:

* [iOS 10 API Diff](https://developer.apple.com/library/prerelease/content/releasenotes/General/iOS10APIDiffs/)
* ["What's New in iOS 10" Release Notes](https://developer.apple.com/library/prerelease/content/releasenotes/General/WhatsNewIniOS/Articles/iOS10.html)
